docs: Clarify recovery key documentation for master key vs. per-user key modes (#14791)
nextcloud/documentation: admin_manual/configuration_files/encryption_configuration.rst

- All files are encrypted with a central server-controlled key.
- Admins can decrypt any user’s files.
- Offers better performance and compatibility with more login/authentication modes.

> - **Recovery keys are not available in master key mode.** If a user forgets their password, admins can reset it and files remain accessible (protected by the master key, not the user password).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Recovery keys are not available in master key mode.** If a user forgets their password, admins can reset it and files remain accessible as they are encrypted by the master key, not the user password.
```

> - Recommended for most deployments due to improved performance and compatibility.

Reviewer: Is it really more performant?
And compatibility with what?

Reviewer: The argument is rather that it is fail proof if the user forgets its password. Another is that user key encryption does not make sense in the threat model of server side encryption, it adds unnecessary complexity, for zero added protection.

Author: Well, one master is always gonna be more performant than user-encryption, no ?
That's what I assumed when reading other threads.
- File sharing doesn't require re-encrypting files for each user for example
- Group changes don't trigger encryption overhead etc etc

Author: But I agree, this is not clear enough. Also, if you think the gain is minimal, then, we can drop that paragraph. But I thought this would be important as user encrypotion looks much more messy than one global master encryptino approach, no ?

Reviewer 2: > Group changes don't trigger encryption overhead etc etc

Just to add, it is not only overhead but if you share a file with a group and later add someone to the group they will see the file but can not open it because encryption for all recipients only happens when the file was shared and at this point in time the user was not in the group. This results in really bad UX.

Reviewer: Indeed, I forgot about the sharing aspect, so we can keep the performance then :+1:

**User Keys:**

- Each user’s files are encrypted with a password-protected key.
- Admins cannot (readily) decrypt files without the user's password, unless a recovery key is defined.
- **Recovery keys are available in user key mode** as an optional safeguard: if a user forgets their password, admins can use the recovery key to reset access.
- If a user forgets their password and no recovery key exists, their files are lost.

> - This mode requires more resources and does not work with all authentication methods (e.g., app passwords, single sign-on).

Reviewer: To be more precise, but I think it is negligible, so not sure if we should even mention it.

```suggestion
- This mode requires more disk space and does not work with all authentication methods (e.g., app passwords, single sign-on).
```

Author: AH, this refers to my other comment, I can drop mentions of this, sure ! 👍

**Enabling file recovery keys:**

.. caution::

>    Recovery keys are **only available in per-user key mode**, not in the default master key mode.

Reviewer: This caution looks like a duplicate of the big paragraph below. Do we really need it?

   If you do not see recovery key options in your Admin Encryption settings, your instance is using
   master key mode (the default and recommended mode). To use recovery keys, you must first switch
   to per-user key mode by running ``occ encryption:disable-master-key`` on a fresh installation

>    (before any files are encrypted).

Reviewer: I don't think anybody will want to switch to user key only to use recovery keys.

```suggestion
   master key mode (the default and recommended mode).
```

Reviewer 2: I agree with @artonge , I would remove the last sentence "To use recovery keys, you must first switch
   to per-user key mode by running ``occ encryption:disable-master-key`` on a fresh installation
   (before any files are encrypted)." 

You can anyway only do it right at the beginning before any files are encrypted.

Troubleshooting
---------------

Why don't I see the recovery key option in the Encryption settings?

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Author: ```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

Troubleshooting
---------------

Why don't I see the recovery key option in the Encryption settings?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Recovery keys are **only available in per-user key mode**. Since Nextcloud 13, the default
encryption mode uses **master keys** (system-wide encryption), which offer better performance

> and compatibility. Master key mode does not expose recovery key options in the Admin settings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
encryption mode uses **master keys** (system-wide encryption). Master key mode does not expose recovery key options in the Admin settings
```

because recovery keys are not needed—admins can reset user passwords and files remain accessible.

If you need recovery key functionality, you must switch to per-user key mode before encrypting

> any files::

Reviewer: Again, not body need that feature unless they are using user key. I would delete.

Author: It's here because it caused confusion. You can see on the foruml and the linked tickets that many users did not understa,d you could only have this on user keys.
I have no clue why people would want this, but if they do, they should know how to ?

Reviewer 2: I think we should make clear that recovery key is not available in the default mode "master key".

But I get the point from @artonge, there is no need for the recovery key by itself. Because you will never have a need for it in the default mode. Their might be a need for per-user-keys (although I think the downsides are larger than all theoretical advantages) and than it is good to have the recovery key option. But I would try to avoid to "generate" a need for the recovery key and therefore make people think it is a good idea to enabled per-user-keys. It is in all aspects a bad idea:

- less performant
- bad UX (as described above with group shares,...)
- limitations (like no SSO)
- recovery-key solved a problem you don't have if you stick to the default

Reviewer 2: also keep in mind that with the recovery process many things can go wrong or it can take very long if people have a lot of files.

The document should position the default (master key) as the state of the art for everyone who enabled server-side encryption today and position the per-user-key as a "compatibility option" for people who have this kind of setup for historical reasons.

Author: Thanks for the input @schiessle !
Really appreciated!
